 Basic Elements of Communication: 

1.  Sender. The person who sends ideas to another person. 

2.  Message. The idea, feeling, suggestion, guidelines, orders, or content intended to be communicated.

3.  Channel or Media. The medium, passage, or route through which the sender passes an encoded message to the receiver. Some generally used forms are face-to-face communication, letters, radio, television, email.

4.  Receiver. The person who acquires and responds to the message given.

5.  Feedback. The response of the receiver. The response indicates the completion of the communication process.

6.  Noise/Barrier: The hindrance in the process of communication. It can take place at any step in the entire process. It reduces the accuracy of communication.

             Two Processes of Communication

1.  Encoding: It is the process of turning thoughts into communication. Moreover, it is the change of conscious thought generally into words, symbols, diagrams, and actions.

2.  Decoding: It is the process of turning communication into thoughts. The translation of the encoded message is converted into a language that is suited to the reader. 


              Principles of Communication

1.  Principle of Clarity – The idea or message to be communicated should be clear and must not contain any ambiguities.

2.  Principle of Attention – For communication to be effective, the message should be able to attract the receiver’s attention.

3.  Principle of Feedback –The recipient should give feedback to show whether they have understood the meaning that the sender intended to send.

4.  Principle of Informality –More often the not, formal communication is more commonly used for the transmission of messages and other information. However, formal communication may not be effective at all times. Thus, informal communication may be more suitable and effective in certain situations. 

5.  Principle of Consistency – This principle states that the communication and the sending party's policies, plans, and objectives should be consistent and should not be in conflict with each other.

6.  Principle of Timeliness – With this principle, there are proper times for communication to be done so that it may help in the implementation of plans as any delays may render the communication useless.

7.  Principle of Adequacy – The information communicated should be adequate and complete in order for proper decisions and action plans to be made.