Art is born in experience; it is the footprint or fingerprint of the artist's experience of reality. Since artists live in a given time, place, and culture, their artworks are statements that probe the concepts of life and reality during their time.

Art has intrinsic worth: The value is in itself

.  Painting is the method of applying paint, pigment, color, or other media to a solid surface (support base).

2.  Sculpture is making 2D or 3D representative or abstract forms, especially by carving stone or wood or casting metal or plaster.

3.  Photography is the art, application, and skill of creating images by recording light or other electromagnetic radiation through an image sensor or light-sensitive materials.

4.  Drawing is a form of visual art. It is when a person uses various drawing instruments to mark on paper or another 2D medium. 

 

Performing Arts. According to the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization or UNESCO (2020), "performing arts range from vocal and instrumental music, dance, and theatre to pantomime, sung verse, and beyond". 

1.  Theater is a collaborative form of fine art that uses live performers, typically actors or actresses. Its goal is to present the experience of an actual or created event before a live audience in a physical place, such a stage. 

2.  Music is a type of art and cultural activity that uses sound as its medium. It is also considered as a sound that is organized in time.

3.  Film is a series of still images that, when shown on screen, create the illusion of moving images. 

4.  Dance is a performing art form consisting of purposefully selected sequences of human movement (Solmerano, 2019). Dance is a kind of nonverbal communication where the body’s movement is aesthetically pleasing and harmonious.

Literature refers to writing considered to have artistic merit:
1.  Prose is a form of language that has no formal metrical structure. It applies a natural flow of speech and ordinary grammatical structure instead of rhythmic structure, such as traditional poetry.

2.  Poetry is a type of literature based on the interplay of words and rhythm. It often uses rhyme and meter (a set of rules governing the number and arrangement of syllables in each line). In poetry, words are strung together to form sounds, images, and ideas that may be complex or abstract to describe directly.