Strengths of the Filipino Character

1.    Pakikipagkapwa-Tao/Fellowship – Filipinos are open to others, feel the same as others, respect others with dignity and deal with them as fellow humans. Filipinos have a sense of justice and fairness, concern, and empathy for others. They are helpful and generous in times of necessity. They practice Bayanihan and usually help each other. Filipinos are very hospitable people. They are also sensitive in dealing with other people. They have a high sense of trust and a remarkable sense of gratitude. They are dependent on interpersonal relationships and give a sense of security, camaraderie, and a feeling of closeness to one another.

2.    Family Orientation – Filipinos genuinely value and love their family. It is a source of personal identity, emotional and material support, and one’s main commitment and responsibility. Filipinos give honor and respect to parents and elders, care for children, generosity toward kin in need, and endures for the welfare of the family. Sense of family gives a feeling of belongingness and rootedness, as well as a basic sense of security.

3.    Joy and Humor – Filipinos are cheerful and fun-loving in life through bad and good times. Pleasant disposition, a sense of humor, and a propensity for happiness contribute to the Filipino charm and indomitability of the Filipino spirit. Laughing at ourselves with the mess we are in is an integral part of our coping mechanism. It manifests in the Filipino’s love for socialization and celebrations even amid most trying times. The result is an emotional balance, optimism, a healthy disrespect for power and office, and a capacity to cope with problems.

4.    Flexibility, Adaptability, and Creativity – Filipinos can adapt and adjust to any circumstance and environment, both physical and social. They can adjust to whatever unplanned or anticipated events that may arise. Filipinos possess a tolerance for ambiguity that enables us to remain unfazed by uncertainty or lack of information. Filipinos are creative, resourceful, quick learners, can improvise and make use of whatever is at hand to create and produce, accept changes, adapt to life in any part of the world, and make new things out of old scraps. Creative in the cultural sphere, the results of these characteristics of Filipinos are productivity, innovation, entrepreneurship, and equanimity.

5.    Hard Work and Industry – Filipinos have a sense of hard work. Filipinos use this characteristic to raise life from one’s standard of living into a higher state of living. Filipinos are willing to take risks to work abroad; when given an opportunity, they get a part-time job for an extra income.

6.    Faith and Religiosity – Filipinos are very religious people. Their innate religiosity enables them to understand and genuinely accept reality according to the will of God. Religious expressions are noticeably expressed every day. They frequently offer prayers and adorations, such as to thank or ask for guidance or forgiveness. These can be observed during fiestas and other special occasions. During calamities, Filipinos are very resilient and establish a positive outlook in life. Filipinos high regard for their religious faith and belief make them survive in their everyday struggles.   

7.    Ability to Survive – Filipinos can survive and make do with whatever is available in the environment. They are very resourceful, flexible, and adaptable in any circumstances in life.                                             

Weaknesses of the Filipino Character

1.    Extreme Personalism – Filipinos view the world in terms of personal relationships. Filipinos deal with their objective task and emotional involvement in a similar way. They tend to interpret certain actions personally. Thus, criticisms may be perceived as a challenge to one’s competence, or complements may be interpreted as a sign of special affection. Filipinos take criticism and praise personally. Personalism is also shown in the necessity for the establishment of personal relationships before any business or work relationship can be successful.

2.    Extreme Family Centeredness – Excessive concern for the family creates an in-group to which the Filipino is fiercely loyal, which is detrimental to the common welfare. Family-centeredness results in a lack of concern for the common good and acts as a block to national consciousness.

3.    Lack of Discipline – The Filipino's lack of discipline is shown in their casual and relaxed attitude toward time and space, lack of precision and compulsiveness, poor time management, and procrastination. They are frequently associated with ningas cogon, that is, starting projects with full vigor and interest and abruptly dies down, leaving things unfinished.

4.    Passivity and Lack of Initiative – Filipinos are generally passive and lack initiative. Filipinos strongly rely on others (e.g., leaders, government) to do things for them, which is related to their need for a strong authority. Filipinos tend to be complacent and often have a sense of urgency about any problem. Filipinos have a high tolerance for inefficiency, poor service, and even a violation of one’s basic rights. Filipinos are overly patient, endure long-suffering, and are easily resigned to their fate. Thus, Filipinos are easily oppressed and exploited.

5.    Colonial Mentality – Filipinos are lesser patriotic compare to other Asian people, and they prefer everything that is foreign such as made in the USA or made in China products. In the same token, younger generations prefer to watch k-drama than its local counterpart. Filipino culture is characterized by openness as characterized by adapting and incorporating foreign elements into our image of ourselves and not built around a deep core of Philippine history and language. (University of Notre Dame du Lac, n.d.)

6.    Kanya-kanya Syndrome –Filipinos have a selfish and egoistic attitude that leads to a feeling of envy and negative emotions against others. Corruption is rampant because of this ambivalent trait. Filipinos tend to undermine their strength as a collective entity. Even the Philippine revolution failed many times because of the selfish interests of the revolutionary generals and other high-ranking officials. (University of Notre Dame du Lac, n.d.)

7.    Lack of Self-analysis and Self-Reflection – Filipinos tend to be shallow, superficial, and even flighty. Sometimes their resilient attitude makes them treat serious matters lightly. Filipinos are poor self-reflection and self-criticism. They crack jokes about the most serious matters that prevent us from looking deeply into the problem. This kind of attitude mostly results in repetitive failures and puts them in a very vulnerable situation, especially to corrupt and exploitative entities. (University of Notre Dame du Lac, n.d.)